---
title: Product Teams & Cultural Design
layout: post
---

I enjoyed [this thoughtful post][1] from Brian on team communication and
decision making. It’s true that some teams will jump from tool to tool for
project management without great reasons or a firm understanding of what their
process challenges are. There are others who are still forming their teams and
trying to create processes that will make them successful.

I think there is something more to dig into after this particular insight:

> Conversations start happening in other tools, a Google Doc becomes the _de
> facto_ backlog, and people start adding work to the project tool after they’ve
> finished it.

The inevitable force that increases team frustration and decreases both tool
satisfaction and communication is, I think, _friction_. Brian is again astute
with his broader observation: even when someone recognizes that decreasing
friction is an intermediate goal on the way to building great products, they
usually blame the tool for the friction. The story is rarely so simple.

I believe that _people_ are far and away the largest cause of communication and
process friction. Thus they are also the best lever for reducing friction. Some
tools are just poorly constructed and cause friction on their own. But as Brian
notes, these aren’t the modern set of tools. Basecamp, Trello, _et cetera_ are
all tools that have been built with user experience in mind, and for the most
part they stay out of the way. Your team, however, may not be so optimized or
well-planned.

## Product-Team-Member Experience
User Experience is now a widely accepted field of study and industry. Many
smart, empathic and driven people spend their lives trying to understand, craft
and improve experiences for users of software, hardware and everyday items we
may not even think about. Designing the experience of an automated teller
machine may be a markedly different task from that of an online payment form,
but both are centered around the experience of the user. We recognize that both
require expertise, sustained effort and repeated experience to successfully
hone.

Product teams are composed of people who have different backgrounds, different
wants and needs, different skill sets and varying degrees of appreciation for
any given sub-discipline of building products, from punctuation and dangling
participles to trailing whitespace and naming variables. This team of yours is
united under the vague banner of building a product together, but their
individual perspectives will always differ, just as the expectations of any
given ATM user may differ from the next one’s.

“Product-team-member experience” is my way of describing this variance in
perspective. Too often we focus on implementation details like our project
management tools, just as a software engineer might get stuck on a choice of
language or framework when what we’re really after is the overall end
experience: how each member of your team experiences and contributes to the
processes you’ve all created.

## Intentional Team Culture
Team culture is often portrayed as the willingness of your team members to help
one another, or your company’s commitments to its customers or employees. These
are useful reflections on culture, but they also seem to be _effects_ rather
than intentions; results rather than stimuli.

What are the stimuli of team culture? Is there a primary stimulus? I think it
might be the product-team-member experience.

* Which accomplishments are celebrated on the Gmail team?
* What does the iPhone team think about bug tracking?
* How do members of the Windows Security team talk about vacations?
* Who cares about the project management tool at Shopify?

Some combination of people and events are responsible for each of the above
reflections on team culture. Those stimuli are your cultural design levers; they
are your opportunities to be intentional and mitigate the effects of history and
happenstance. You can help define what it means to be a member of your team by
defining a role to grow and shape your culture. Many teams owe their success or
failure largely to chance and random acts of leadership from members of the
team, with no real overall sense of direction or purposeful shared values.
Reflecting on your team’s cultural trajectory and making suggestions, asking
questions, submitting proposals and communicating decisions can make the
difference between an accidental failure and a constantly evolving and improving
bloc of product builders.

If your team’s culture imbues its members with the responsibility to broadcast
UI decisions via email or document code deployments on wiki pages, your team
members will feel fulfilled when they accomplish those tasks. They will develop
expectations and judgments around adherence to the culture and grow protective
of it over time. Just as an industrial designer may be faced with a great task
to enhance a familiar household object, a cultural designer is constantly faced
with the enhancement and evolution of their team’s shared values and
perspectives.

## Conclusion
The invitation I’m extending is to take notice and take action in the design of
your team culture, to decrease friction and increase potential. Introduce a new
role and have that person ask some hard questions and propose some long-term
designs. Introduce a new tool if you must, but think also about what your team
members value and how you can get them to put effort into the tools and
processes you use. Some teams may struggle with understanding decisions that
have been made about the product, so they will likely benefit from a tool or set
of habits that make decisions more discoverable. Other teams may feel pressure
about taking time off from work and enjoying their families: an opportunity for
cultural design that could decrease stress and increase productivity.

Like many of the hardest problems in the world, cultural design is a problem of
people and change. Also like those many hard problems, it’s worth solving
through sustained creative effort. No one should be fooled into thinking that
any of it can be solved with a simple change of tool. This is why I am a product
team leader and these are the problems that I try to solve.

 [1]: https://bb.place/what-project-tools-are-missing/
