---
title: Leading with Accountability
layout: post
---

Leading people and projects in a complex organization is difficult. I’m sure
there are many ways to break down the difficulties of leadership into
categories, but I’m busy so I’ll focus on two: tactical work and strategic work.

## Tactics vs. Strategy
Tactically, leaders needs the organizations to run well each and every day.
Teams need to deliver results, and issues need to be handled. (There are always
issues. Humans are humans, after all.) This means that the teams need a *system*
for their work (e.g. [Agile software
development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development)): a way
of assigning responsibilities, accomplishing tasks, communicating, resolving
difficulties, and monitoring results. Leaders need to make sure that system is
in place and working well. That’s tactics.

Strategically, leaders have a completely different set of challenges. Teams can
be delivering incremental results and tackling issues that arise, but toward
which goals are they working? Often, the broad goals sound simple enough:
increase revenue, develop repeat customers, reduce overhead. Translating those
high-level goals into an effective machine, though—successive cycles of project
inception, execution, evaluation, and direction-changing—is the work of
strategy.

In a complex organization with tens of teams across many functions, each working
toward a long list of goals, leaders are challenged to manage the strategic
work. Just keeping track of the inventory of those efforts (“What are all of
these teams even doing?”) is difficult enough, but something else happens inside
this complexity: humans decide to behave like humans.

## Power vs. Truth
In a large organization, each team becomes a locus of power, as does each
department, on up the hierarchical chain. Each leader of one of these groups is
then, in part, a wielder of this power. They have the power to build
relationships, trade favors, influence others and to report on what is true
within their particular group.

The problem with power is that it corrupts. Not necessarily *Narcos* levels of
corruption and backstabbing, but small distortions of truth will start to emerge
within each of these groups, often in pursuit of otherwise reasonable goals.
Leaders will then start to create and spin narratives to influence those in
greater positions of power to shift practices in favor of their group: they
become politicians.

There is a plausible argument that in large nations, politicians play a messy
but necessary role intermediating between facts and human interests one the one
hand, which are innumerable, and strategic decision making on the other, which
is, in that environment, necessarily blunt and only loosely tied to
effectiveness of outcomes.

Unlike national governments, most organizations are not complex enough to evade
the intellectual grasp of any particular leader, which means they should in
principle be able to make good strategic decisions—managing those cycles of
project inception, execution, evaluation, and direction-changing—if they have
the relevant skills and truths about the organization.

In this environment, politics are bad if they distort the truth. Because, with
the truth, each leader can hold their teams accountable to results with known
impact on the organization, which enables each part of the organization to
remain both aligned and effective, and enables leaders to make better strategic
decisions.

## Reporting the News
In uncorrupted journalism, the goal is to gather and verify facts, then to
create a narrative that puts those facts into context with an honest attempt at
a human interpretation of the truth. The journalist’s job is to do the ground
work—the background, the details—to tell the truth about their subject.

They don’t list hundreds of dates, times, location coordinates, and actions
(facts) for their readers to puzzle into a larger picture, nor do they invent a
nice story (fiction) that ignores or distorts the facts. Instead, they assemble
the picture for the reader while trying to represent the context and the truth
of the matter as accurately as possible. They report the news.

If organizational leaders were to act more like journalists and less like
politicians, each team, department and leader would report the news of their
individual piece of the whole up and across to other leaders, and, if those
other leaders were competent and earnest, more effective strategic decisions
could be made.

## Accountability
Accountability in a large organization looks like a leader asking hard questions
of a journalist, about outcomes affecting the whole. Bill Gates became famous
for this style of [deep dives into technical
minutiae](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2006/06/16/my-first-billg-review/) with
leaders at Microsoft who brought him problems, solutions or updates. He would
aggressively question assumptions, ask about memory layouts, edge cases or
algorithmic complexity—not because he thought his leaders were wrong or
incompetent, but to ensure that they were thorough and truthful.

To be effective as an individual (or in a team of five or ten) is a small thing
easily handled by typical human social behaviors. To remain effective in an
organization of 1,000; 5,000; 15,000+ requires that leaders build accountability
into the machine of the organization. Accountability that asks hard questions,
deals in truths and enables strategic management of complex challenges.

I fear that too few of us get to work within such a well-run machine. Most
leaders fail to delegate the tactics, fail to be competent enough to make good
strategic decisions or fail to hold their organization accountable with thorough
knowledge of the truths within it. I hope that we can each find better paths
toward effectiveness.
