---
layout: post
title: How to Pass a Manager Interview
---

Interviewing to hire managers is a strange and squishy process at best. The team
trying to hire the manager has an idea of the types of responsibilities the role
will have, and they know who the person hired will work with. But then they must
talk to perfect strangers (candidates), and in under an hour each, decide
whether that person will be able to fill the role for years—leading others and
taking responsibility for a team—based only or mostly on what the candidate
says.

The hiring manager usually starts with a resume, of course, but a manager
candidate’s resume is sort of like a map without many details: you might be able
to get a high-level sense of what to expect, but you have no idea what things
are going to look and feel like until you encounter them. The best way to learn
about how a person works in a role is, of course, to work with them in that
role, or talk to someone credible who has worked with them. But, short of hiring
each candidate and spending months with them, a hiring manager is in want of
some way to understand relevant details about how a candidate works.

## Tell a great story
Humans have evolved to learn and to extend trust by listening to stories, and
trying to assess their credibility. If you are a manager candidate, then, one of
the best tools that you have is the power of your stories. You will be asked
pointed questions about your experience as a manager, and you don’t want to give
quick, pithy answers. Instead, you want to understand what the interviewer is
trying to learn about you, and then to tell them a relevant (and true) story
about your experience that relates to the topic in question. Be concise, yes—and
witty and self-deprecating if you can manage it—but most importantly you want to
convey *what it was like* to be in the situation that you describe.

Your story should have a cast of characters, a plot that relates to the topic,
and a story arc: setup, conflict and a resolution. You can direct a lot about
how your story will be interpreted by the framing you give it, but a good goal
is to create space for the interviewer(s) to imagine themselves as one of the
characters in your story, so they can gain an empathic perspective and perform a
more informed evaluation of the situation. Think of it like the world’s shortest
novellas, comprised of your work life experiences.

Other aspects of good novel writing apply just as well, too: if your characters
are too simple or too detailed, you will lose credibility or attention; if you
cast yourself as the hero and fail to show any real human struggle, your
listener is unlikely to form a positive opinion of either the hero or the
author; and if the conflict you present is too easily solved, your listener is
not going to be convinced that you are a good manager or a good author.

## Teach a person to fish, and be remembered as a teacher
To really shine and rise above nearly all other candidates, try to teach your
interviewers one new thing through your stories. This will not be easy, as your
interviewers are likely to be quite experienced in their roles, but if you can
teach them something new about any subject near to their own work, they are much
more likely to remember you as someone who can teach. And teachers are more
trusted storytellers, which means the rest of your stories will gain more
credibility.

What you can teach will certainly depend on your own experience and style, but
some examples might be: a surprising or unconventional solution to a problem you
faced, a new method or practice that you developed in your work, or an insight
into a new mental model or perspective for thinking about a problem that the
interviewer is also likely to have. If the interviewer starts thinking about how
your lesson might apply to their own circumstances, you’re more than half way to
becoming memorable *and* useful.

Like all good stories, yours will require practice and effort to develop and
hone over time, but I promise that you will have much more interview success if
you know that you should be telling stories all along, instead of giving
clipped, unemotional, direct answers to questions asked during interviews. The
good news is that you should know your subject better than anyone, which is a
great start to telling a great story.
