---
title: Problems with “Headcount” at Profitable Companies
layout: post
tag: essay
lang: en
---

In medium-to-large-sized companies, there is a term of art to denote _a set of
open requisitions for hire or current full-time employees on a team_, and that
term is “**headcount**.” A certain team may be created “with 5 headcount” or a
director may barter for “more headcount” in their department or a team may
currently have “8 headcount allocated.”

_Headcount_ are treated as a durable and fungible good among managers and
executives: they can persist, move, be traded, budgeted for, invested in,
reduced or disappeared. Setting aside the bizarre collision of the impersonal
word with the fact that these headcount eventually describe real, breathing
humans, there are some business inefficiencies that also come with its usage.

## Problems with headcount
At the simplest level, **headcount are people who are paid in dollars** (or the
business’s local currency), but then mixed in with some strange attributes like
_which manager the headcount have belonged to_, or _what level or bonus class
each headcount is approved for_, or _which financial quarter it’s targeted for
hire_. These attributes can accumulate on a particular headcount over time, and
they sometimes restrict what can happen with regard to hiring or changing a
team, often for the worse.

### Headcount end up feeling fungible to senior leaders
When many senior business leaders consider things like investment cases and
quarterly business performance, they sometimes reach for control of future costs
to tune the business’s operating income. Often, this control comes in the form
of _trading headcount_ or _changing attributes of headcount_, like approved hire
date. But what those leaders are actually trying to accomplish is cost
management to a budget: dollars spent over time.

Using headcount as a proxy to control costs often creates political problems
between departments and teams—because of their ownership and varied
restrictions—and the fungibility of headcount can encourage top-down control
over all headcount, rather than delegation of that responsibility to each
individual department or team.

### Headcount accumulate a collectible-type value to their holders
Much like unique collectible stamps or coins, open [for hire] headcount
sometimes accumulate abstract collectible value based on their history and
ownership. Managers will get into arguments about how their “Jane backfill for
the app team has been delayed 4 times, and down-leveled after it was up-leveled,
and John agreed to trade his Joe backfill for the headcount in next year’s
budget!” This in an environment where Jane quit 18 months ago, and the
operational needs of this manager’s team are different today than they were at
that time.

By clinging to the arbitrary attributes of whatever headcount and backfills have
accumulated and been traded around and manipulated, managers, directors and
support organizations like HR often lose sight of what actually matters to a
team at the current moment: is the team in a good operational posture? Does it
need additional people hired? How much will that cost?

### Managers make lower-quality decisions with headcount vs. dollars
Managers also often form emotional attachments to backfills and open headcount
because of the sometimes lengthy travails they endure to keep them, upgrade
them, trade them, etc. This means when it comes time to working with their peers
and other departments to solve tricky cross-team and cross-organization budget
issues, they can lock onto their headcount with an iron grip, rather than
looking dispassionately at the problem in terms of dollars spent over time.

Managers will almost always be in tension between the health of their own team
and the larger organization around them, but when that tension is complicated by
emotionally-laden collectible headcount trinkets, those managers end up making
poorer-quality decisions about hiring, budgets and organizational operations
than they would when dealing with the black-and-white of dollars and balance
sheets.

### Not all headcount are created equal
Lastly, especially at higher levels of management, headcount are often created,
traded, delayed and destroyed in batches—10 new headcount for this team, 12
headcount moved to that department. But this batch treatment hides complexity
about the _differences_ between individual roles, costs, levels and other
aspects required to hire and retain people in those roles.

For instance, a specialized manager of data science role may cost significantly
more than an individual web developer on a team, but they are often allocated
right alongside one another as simply “2 headcount,” hiding their cost
differences and ultimately diluting accountability to the bottom line.

Growing a robust and sustainable organization that responds to the dynamic
pressures of the market will require making strategic batch-level budget
decisions, but hiding dollars by using _headcount_ obscures many of the problems
facing the business in that pursuit.

## A better way forward
Hopefully an alternate way is obvious: enable teams to plan in dollars and time.
If the company has quarterly expectations for operating income or its components
(the “top line” and “bottom line” being chief among them), work with directors
of departments and managers of teams to give them a budget in real dollars and
cents. Then keep them updated as business conditions change and trust them to
make the best decisions for their teams, within the scope of their changing
budget.

When a team simply must stay under a dollar target for salaries on their team,
they can make hiring decisions (and other compensation changes) that will make
them most effective given the current landscape of their team and those
adjacent. Gone are the days of advocating for Jane’s 18-month-old backfill at a
Senior level, and coming are those where the team has comfortable headroom to
add $16,000 per month to its bottom line. So they will.

None of this is a substitute for good financial planning, and holding income in
reserve to cover unexpected expenses and downturns in the top line: that
planning must still happen, and using good sense ratios of full-time employment
in the bottom line versus other expenses is still prudent. But now at least
everyone is talking in terms of dollars and sense.
