---
layout: post
title: Culture Eats Relationships for Lunch
tag: essay
lang: en
---

**Certain organizations have a culture that _encourages and enables_ the
creation of new and healthy relationships among colleagues, and others have a
culture that causes competition, mistrust, and toxicity.**

In one of my roles, I was hired based mostly on my experience solving technical
problems on many past teams. A few months in, though, I was promoted and
switched career tracks into management, based on trust built with my manager and
a bet on my skill development when he was also promoted. In my new role, there
were all kinds of people I wanted to meet and with whom I could start building
trust.

I jumped into it like I try to approach all of my work: vigorously and with an
open mind. I set up a bunch of meetings to get to know department heads and team
leads across the business. To a person, everyone was open, inviting, and ready
to trust me as a new leader on the team. They had patience for me, time for me,
and they assumed that we would build a fruitful relationship. And I worked hard
to make sure their confidence was not misplaced.

In another role at a different company, I was hired into management. Gaining the
trust of the team did not take long, but this time when I reached out to set up
meetings with departments heads and team leaders outside of my immediate
department, I was met with significant amounts of impatience, skepticism, and
disinterest. Not everyone, of course: there were wonderful and generous people,
but I got the sense that these people were great on their own—they were not
*expected* to be open, inviting, and ready to trust as part of the company
culture.

Years on, I look back and can validate some of my experience: the culture of
that second company did not encourage the type of openness and trust that
enables strong relationships to be built. Rather, the strong relationships
there were more often built to *cope with* a larger culture of unhealthy
competition and a lack of trust across departments. That culture ended up eating
away at the good will and assumption of trust that people can be led to give, to
build stronger teams.

As you reflect on culture, think about whether yours is one that encourages and
enables new relationships across the organization, or whether people too quickly
mistrust or show disdain for their colleagues. Because, while having a culture
that is strong enough to “eat strategy for breakfast” can be powerful, having
one that eats your relationships for lunch will leave you hungry and&nbsp;weak.
