---
title: Paid Time Off
layout: post
tag: essay
---

The companies with the best time-off policies understand that ample time off for
workers isn’t a luxury granted from on high, but a reflection of a civilized
society, a benefit ultimately reaped by the business, and respectful to humans
who work to build and live a life apart from work.

---

I live in a country where it is _standard_ to give employees two weeks of paid
time off (PTO) per year. Ten days out of over two-hundred fifty working days in
a year. Many companies will also only include 6–8 holidays over 12 months.

Let’s say I come from a big family, and I want to find time to visit different
parts of my family, the bulk of whom also live halfway across the country. If I
worked for one of these companies and I visited my family for one week around
the Christmas holiday—about 1–2 days per section of my big family—I could get
away with taking only 4 PTO days. Now, imagine that my partner also has a family
and we would like to see them too. While they are closer, they are still a
12-hour drive away. If we take a very short trip and only spend 3 days with
them, I could plan it for a weekend, and then only take 3 more PTO days—2 days
of driving and 3 days of visiting over 2 days of a weekend.

Now, imagine my partner and I have been together for a few years and we’d love
to take a simple vacation together for one week to New Orleans, an affordable
and drivable destination from Austin. Well, if we time it just right and align
it with one of the very few 3-day holiday weekends, we could manage to pay
holiday rates to take _one day less than a week of vacation_ with my remaining 3
days of PTO, and come straight back to work for this type of company.

That’s it. For the year. We are able to take a total of 3 trips, see my large
family once for no more than 1–2 days per person, see my partner’s family no
more than once, and have just one cheap vacation together, for less than a full
week. 3 days of PTO spent on my mental well-being with my partner and 7 days
spent fulfilling family obligations.

I don’t know about you, but I’d like to see my mom more than 1–2 days a year. It
would also be nice if I could see my newborn nephew for more than one evening in
his entire first year on the planet, or in fact if I could see my cousins at
all. Taking small day trips with my grandparents also seems to grow more
important with every year they age. And all of this is only family; I haven’t
even begun to think of exploring new cities, relaxing on beaches or climbing
mountains. Three days of relaxation and three more of a tourist-filled holiday
atmosphere in an entire year isn’t exactly my idea of a _mental recharge_.

The two-week PTO schedule is absurd, counterproductive, and disrespectful.

## Absurd
[![Paid vacations and Paid holidays, OECD nations][1]][2]

Some of the reasoning behind our paltry “standard” vacation is surely cultural.
The United States does not _require_ that businesses give workers any vacation
at all. Zero. Via the magic of [anchoring][3], businesses feel almost _generous_
for giving ten whole days when they are required to allot zilch. In an
environment where the cultural norm is deigning to give barely enough time for
workers to meet even the barest family commitments, antagonism emerges between
companies and workers, and the already arduous tasks of work seem bleak and
endless for workers trapped with these policies. The companies, too, end up
thinking of their people more as _resources_ or _hours worked_ instead of as
actual living humans, or even as beings that inevitably produce inconsistent
results over time due to varying levels of productivity.

## Counterproductive
Humans are susceptible to stress, distraction, burnout, and exhaustion. Every
person is physically and psychologically different, and every person also has
different life circumstances that can lead to more or less stress and its
numerous effects. Some of the most obvious effects of these symptoms are a lack
of focus, diminished creativity, and a decrease in productive output for
workers. We don’t need scientists to tell us these things, as they are plainly
obvious to any observer. But if you are inclined toward research, [there is
plenty][4].

Happy, fulfilled people are productive and innovative people who will do a
better job, often even better than the “most productive” workers who are in the
process of burning out. It’s amazing how much benefit a relaxed mind and a fresh
perspective can bring to work, especially for knowledge workers who deal and
create in ideas. A few measly days smashed onto a holiday weekend at some point
in the year will not yield people with the attitude and outlook that companies
want. The obviousness of this observation is so stark that the dissonance of
companies embracing these policies defies good business sense.

## Disrespectful
The most important quality of every great manager is empathy. Empathy doesn’t
mean crying in the closet alongside a team member who’s recently broken up with
their partner, nor does it mean sharing feelings in a touchy-feely forced office
seminar. Empathy is borne of respect and the perspective to understand that
one’s own life circumstances, advantages, outlook, judgments and emotions are
not shared by everyone. Empathy enables a great manager to _create space_ for a
team member to live a life with different challenges, make different mistakes,
and focus on different priorities.

Empathy is asking “How can I be a better human for these people?” without a full
understanding of what it feels like to be them.

One of the least empathic environments a leader could create is one that is
completely homogeneous and based entirely off their own personality, life
experiences, and individual challenges. The employee who lives across the
country from their family will experience life differently from the one who
lives two blocks away from theirs, or the other who is the only one left living
in theirs. Those who have children will have a profoundly different experience
from those who are single and have tens of thousands of dollars in savings.
Employees with arthritis, disabilities, or a chronic heart condition will
experience life in a dramatically different way from those who do not suffer
with the daily burden of living with what they must.

Great leaders understand that it is not their place to judge others’ life
circumstances, regardless of how little they understand about _why_ or _how_
those circumstances came to be. The creation of companies and environments that
do not create space for employees to be _different and fulfilled_ in unknowable
ways is an act of disrespect toward those people. Whether through ignorance or
indifference, leaders who perpetuate these environments are hostile not only to
the diversity of humanity on whom they rely, but also to the business itself,
which is worse both for its moral failing and the diminished output of its
workers.

## Enough
How much paid time off is enough? I can’t answer that definitively for every
company, and every company leader should take the time to form the perspective
necessary to create an empathic policy.

Many companies now have an open vacation policy, where employees are not only
able but _encouraged_ to take the time they need to step back and gain the calm
and perspective that only an extended break can bring. The encouragement and
empathy built into their cultures are crucial aspects of their uncapped vacation
policy, though, fending off otherwise negative social pressure that can lead to
“open vacation” policies meaning zero vacation.

[Basecamp][5] has a four-day work week during the summer, explicitly set up to
allow their employees to take more time for their lives outside of work. This in
addition to 3 weeks of paid vacation and a cache of “personal days” to cover all
manner of life circumstances.

Other companies are experimenting with [minimum vacation policies][6], which
combine the benefits of an uncapped setup with the very explicit expectation
that workers take regular time off to live their lives and come back to make the
company stronger. There seems to be some wisdom around the idea of one week per
quarter being a reasonable balance of vacation to excellent quality work, plus a
generous set of holidays and maybe a few more days for family obligations.

Leaders have the challenge of not only learning empathy and establishing the
perspective necessary to build great teams, but to then _create the space_ for
those people to flourish. I hope to see many more leaders take on this challenge
and dispense with our “standard” two-week national disgrace.

 [1]: /img/pto-01.jpg
 [2]: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2730947/Americans-paid-vacation-time-world-countries-enjoy-FORTY-days-year.html
 [3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchoring
 [4]: https://hbr.org/2009/10/making-time-off-predictable-and-required
 [5]: https://m.signalvnoise.com/employee-benefits-at-basecamp-d2d46fd06c58
 [6]: https://medium.com/@cameronmoll/the-minimum-vacation-policy-15f6c3b922f#.kd1fa6thf
